---
layout: post
title: "What is Data Science?"
date: 2021-01-01 00:00:01 +0700
author: "Learning Archive"
tags: technology web markdown learning_archive
series: DS101
preview: "Back in the early 60's, Barbra Streisand sang, 'People who need people are the luckiest people in the world.' And really, the need for belonging, the need to connect, and the need to be valued are all fundamental human motivations. As it happens, working in data science can actually help fulfill some of these foundational needs."
---

## 1. Supply and demand for data science

Back in the early 60's, Barbra Streisand sang, "People who need people "are the luckiest people in the world." And really, the need for belonging, the need to connect, and the need to be valued are all fundamental human motivations. As it happens, working in data science can actually help fulfill some of these foundational needs. By placing you in a position to one, do something wonderful for other people and two, in return to be valued for it. It goes back to something that a Harvard Business Review had to say about it back in 2012. Thomas Davenport and D.J. Patil made the extraordinary claim that data science, of all things, was the sexiest job of the 21st century. But they had good reasons for saying this. They are argued that data scientists had one, a valuable combination of rare qualities that two, put them in high demand. So here are some of the rare qualities. Data scientists are able to find order, meaning, and value in unstructured data. That's online sources, the graphs of social networks, audio, images, videos, and so on. They're able to predict outcomes like who's likely to purchase something or who poses a security threat, or who's likely to develop a disease, or respond well to a new treatment. They're able to automate processes like getting individualized recommendations while shopping, identifying friends in photographs, or giving psychological support in AI chat bots. And they're in high demand for a couple of really simple reasons. They provide hidden insight. Data science is able to show you things that you simply can't find through other means. And that hidden insight, in turn, provides significant competitive advantage to any organization that has the good foresight to employ and really make the most of data science. Give you a little bit more information about supply and demand here. Number one, there's been extraordinary growth in job ads. People are looking for data science. So for example, a January 2019 report from Indeed reported a 29% increase in job ads for data science over one year and 344% over six years. This is extraordinary growth. Next, they showed that there's growth in job searches. People actually trying to find jobs in data science. And they found only a 14% growth over one year. Now that may sound a little low, but the important thing to hear is that the demand is outstripping the availability. And any time that happens, you've got value. And what this means, you know, again, specifically, the gap in supply and demand is it significant? LinkedIn reported a gap of over 150,000 jobs in data science. And it's even more dramatic when you show in related fields like machine learning engineer, artificial intelligence specialist, and so on. It's big. There are so many possibilities here to do something that is valued for others. And it's reflected in the salaries for data science. The average salary in data science is $107,000 a year. Which, just for comparison purposes, is over twice the national median in the U.S. of $47,000 a year. And that means that this is one of the best jobs in the U.S. Glass Door in January of 2019 published it's annual list of best jobs in America and for the fourth year in a row, data scientist is at the top of the list, based on job satisfaction, number of openings, salary. It really lets you know there is extraordinary potential here, something that you can provide of amazing value for potential employers. And you fan fulfill that great need and you can be valued for the things that you're able to contribute by embracing the methods and the benefits of data science in your work.

## 2. The data science Venn diagram

Sometimes the whole is greater than the sum of its parts, and you can see this in a lot of different places. Take, for instance, music. You take John, and Paul, and George, and Ringo, all wonderful musicians in their own rights, but put them together and you have The Beatles and you have revolutionized popular culture. Or take the fact that everybody has a circle of friends and basically everybody has the internet now, and you have created social networks and you have revolutionized the computing world. Or in 2013, Drew Conway proposed the combination of hacking skills, that's computer programming, and math and statistics, and substantive or topical domain expertise, together give you data science, a new field that has revolutionized both the technology and the business world. And I want to talk a little more about why each of those three elements in the Venn diagram of data science are so important. First one, the hacking skills or computer programming, the reason that's important is because you have such novel sources of data. You have social media and social networks, you have challenging formats like the graph data from those social networks or images or video that don't fit into the rows and columns of a spreadsheet, or you have streaming data like sensor data or live web data that comes in so fast that you can't pause it to analyze it. All of these require the creativity that comes with hacking and the ability to work freely with what you have in front of you. Now in terms of actual computer programming skills, there's a few things that are very useful in data science. The ability to work with a language like Python or R, these are programming languages that are very frequently used for data manipulation and modeling. There's C, and C++, and Java. These are general-purpose languages that are used for the back end, the foundational elements of data science, and they provide maximum speed. There's S-Q-L or SQL. That stands for structured query language. This is a language for working with relational databases to do queries and data manipulation. And then there are packages you can use in other languages like TensorFlow. This is an open-source library that's used for deep learning and it has revolutionized the way that data science is performed right now. And then there's the mathematical elements of data science. First off, there's several forms of mathematics that are particularly useful in data science. There's probability, and linear algebra, and calculus, and regression, and I'll talk about some of each of these, but they allow you to do something important. Number one, they allow you to choose the procedures. You want to judge the fit between your question, which is always the first and most important thing, the data that you have available to you, and then you choose a procedure that answers your questions based on your data. And if you understand the mathematics and how it works, you'll be able to make a much better and more informed choice. And also, you'll be able to diagnose problems. Murphy's Law applies in data science as well as everywhere else that anything that can go wrong, will go wrong, and you need to know what to do when the procedures that you've chosen fail or they give sometimes impossible results. You need to understand exactly how the data's being manipulated so you can see where the trouble areas are and how to resolve them. And then the third area of Conway's data science Venn diagram is substantive expertise. This is each domain or topic area has its own goals, methods, and constraints. If you're working in social media marketing, you're going to have a very different set of goals and methods than if you're working in biomedical informatics. And you need to know what constitutes value in the particular domain you're working in. And finally, how to implement the insights because data science is an action-oriented field. It's designed to tell you what to do next to get the most value, provide the best service that you possibly can based on the data that you have. So taken together, the hacking or programming, the math and statistics, and the substantive expertise are the individual elements or components, the parts that make up the larger-than-the-sum whole of data science.

## 3. The data science pathway

The insights you get from data science can feel like a gift to your business, but you don't get to just open your hands and get it delivered to you with a bow on it. Really, there are a lot of moving parts and things that have to be planned and coordinated for all of this to work properly. I like to think of data science projects like walking down a pathway, where each step gets you closer to the goal that you have in mind. And with that I want to introduce you to a way of thinking about the data science pathway. It begins with planning your project. You first need to define your goals. What is it that you're actually trying to find out or accomplish? That way you can know when you're on target or when you need to redirect a little bit. You need to organize your resources. That can include things as simple as getting the right computers and the software, accessing the data, getting people and their time available. You need to coordinate the work of those people because data science is a team effort. Not everybody's going to be doing the same thing and some things have to happen first and some happen later. You also need to schedule the project so it doesn't expand to fill up an enormous amount of time. Time boxing, or saying we will accomplish this task in this amount of time, can be especially useful in working on a tight timeframe or you have a budget and you're working with a client. After planning, the next step is going to be wrangling, or preparing the data. That means you need to first get the data. You may be gathering new data, you may be using open data sources, you may be using public APIs, but you have to actually get the raw materials together. The next one, step six, is cleaning the data, which actually is an enormous task within data science. It's about getting the data ready so it fits into the paradigm, for instance, the program and the applications that you're using, that you can process it to get the insight that you need. Once the data's prepared and it's in your computer, you need to explore the data, maybe making visualizations, maybe doing some numerical summaries, a way of getting a feel of what's going on in there. And then, based on your exploration, you may need to refine the data. You may need to re-categorize cases. You may need to combine variables into new scores. Any of the things that can help you get it prepared for the insight. The third category in your data pathway is modeling. This is where you actually create the statistical model and you do the linear regression. You do the decision tree. You do the deep learning neural network. But then, you need to validate the model. How well do you know this is going to generalize from the current data set to other data sets. In a lot of research that step is left out and you often end up with conclusions that fall apart when you go to new places. So, validation's a very important part of this. The next step is evaluating the model. How well does it fit the data? What's the return on investment for it? How usable is it going to be? And then, based on those, you may need to refine the model. You may need to try processing a different way, adjust the parameters in your neural network, get additional variables to include in your linear regression. Any one of those can help you build a better model to achieve the goals that you had in mind in the first place. And then finally, the last part of the data pathway is applying the model and that includes presenting the model, showing what you learned to other people, to the decision makers, to the invested parties, to your client, so they know what it is that you've found. Then you deploy the model. Say for instance, you created a recommendation engine. You actually need to put it online so that it can start providing these recommendations to clients or you put it into a dashboard so it can start providing recommendations to your decision makers. You will eventually need to revisit the model, see how well it's performing, especially when you have new data and maybe a new context in which it's operating. And then, you may need to revise it and try the process over again. And then finally, once you've done all of this there's the matter of archiving the assets, really cleaning up after yourself is very important in data science. It includes documenting where the data came from and how you process it. It includes commenting the code that you used to analyze it. It includes making things future proof. All of these together can make the project more successful, easier to manage, easier to get the return on investment calculations for it, and those together will make the project more successful by following each of these steps. Taken together those steps on the pathway get you to your goal. It could be an amazing view at the end of your hike, or it could be an amazing insight into your business model, which was your purpose all along.

## 4. Roles and teams in data science

Data science is fundamentally a team sport. There are so many different skills and so many different elements involved in a data science project that you're going to need people from all sorts of different backgrounds with different techniques to contribute to the overall success of the project. I want to talk about a few of these important roles. The first one is the data engineers. These are the developers, and the system architects, the people who focus on the hardware and the software that make data science possible. They provide the foundation for all of the other analyses. They focus on the speed, and the reliability, and the availability of the work that you do. Next are machine learning specialists. These are people who have extensive work in computer science and in mathematics. They work in deep learning. They work in artificial intelligence. And they're the ones who have the intimate understanding of the algorithms and understand exactly how they're working with the data to produce the results that you're looking for. And then, an entirely different vein are people who are researchers, and by that I mean topical researchers. They focus on domain-specific research like, for instance, physics and genetics are common, so is astrophysics, so is medicine, so is psychology, and these kinds of researchers, while they connect with data science, they are usually better versed in the design of research within their particular field and doing common statistical analyses, that's where their expertise lies, but they connect with data science in that they're trying to find the answers to some of these big-picture questions that data scientists can also contribute to. Also, any business doing its job has analysts. These are people who do the day-to-day data tasks that are necessary for any business to run efficiently. Those include things like web analytics, and S-Q-L, that's SQL or Structured Query Language, data visualizations, and the reports that go into business intelligence. These allow people to make decisions. It's for good business decision-making that lets you see how you're performing, where you need to reorient, and how you can better reach your goals. Then there are the managers. These are the people who manage the entire data science project, and they're in charge of doing a couple of very important things. One is they need to frame the business-relevant questions and solutions. So, they're the ones who have the big picture. They know what they're trying to accomplish with that. And then, they need to keep people on track and moving towards it. And, to do that, they don't necessarily need to know how to do a neural network, they don't need to make the data visualization, but they need to speak data so they can understand how the data relates to the question they're trying to answer, and they can help take the information that the other people are getting and putting it together into a cohesive whole. Now, there are people who are entrepreneurs. And, in this case, you might have a data-based startup. The trick here is you often need all of the skills, including the business acumen, to make the business run well. You also need some great creativity in planning your projects and the execution that get you towards your entrepreneurial goals. And then there's the unicorn, also known as the rock star, or the ninja. This is a full-stack data scientist who can do it all, and do it at absolute peak performance. Well, it's a nice thing to have, on the other hand, that thing is very rare which is why we call them the unicorn. Also, you don't want to rely on one person for everything. Aside from the fact that they're hard to find, and sometimes hard to keep, you're only getting a single perspective or approach to your business questions, and you usually need something more diverse than that. And what suggests is the common approach to getting all the skills you need for a data project, and that is by team, and you can get a unicorn by team where you can get the people who have all the necessary skills, from the foundational data engineer, to the machine learning specialist, to the analyst, to the managers, all working together to get the insight from your data and help your project reach its greatest potential in moving your organization towards its own goals.