---
layout: post
title: "Analyze project risks"
date: 2021-01-03 00:03:00 +0700
author: "Learning Archive"
tags: project_management risk learning_archive
series: PM101
preview: "All these risks, it's just too much. They're making me crazy. How could you manage a project without spending 120% of your time managing risk? The answer is perform a qualitative risk analysis to prioritize your risks. To do so, perform a quick high-level assessment of their probability and impact."
---

## 1. Qualitative and quantitative risk analysis

All these risks, it's just too much. They're making me crazy. How could you manage a project without spending 120% of your time managing risk? The answer is perform a qualitative risk analysis to prioritize your risks. To do so, perform a quick high-level assessment of their probability and impact. Here's my approach. First, assess the impact of each risk. Determine if each risk would have a high, medium, or low project impact. The impacts you consider should include cost, schedule, and deliverable quality. Second, do the same for probability, high, medium, or low. Keep it simple. The point is to get a quick high-level ranking for all your risks. It's a filter to help you work out which risks are worth spending your time on. Now, the next step, sort the results. This will give you a high-level reference for which risks need to be examined further. You'll want to address your high probability, high-impact risks first, then look at your risks rated with lower probabilities and impacts. For all of your risks with low ratings, you're probably not going to examine them much further, and that's okay. After you've performed a qualitative analysis and identified the risks you should consider managing, then you conduct a quantitative risk analysis on your top-ranked risks. Quantitative analysis is the process that informs you how much you could spend to address a risk. For example, you don't want to spend $10,000 to address a risk that will cost you $5,000 if the risk event occurs. Here are my steps for quantitative analysis. First, refine the probability for each risk occurring. Because we're looking for a more refined estimate, assign a probability in increments of 10. So, 10%, 20%, and so forth. Second, estimate the cost of your project if a risk occurs. This could be hard to estimate, but give it a try. The third step is to multiply your estimates for the probability and cost impact for each risk and sort the result. This will highlight your most important risks. For example, Risk A has a probability of occurring of 70%, and an impact of $10,000. The resulting answer would be 70% of 10,000 or $7,000. If Risk B had a probability of 30% and a cost impact of $150,000 the result would be 30% of $150,000 or $45,000 so Risk B should be addressed before Risk A. The last step is to take your most important risks and ask, if I was going to address this risk, how much would this cost? There could be a number of ways to address a risk. However, the greater the potential impact, the more analysis you'll want to perform. So that's it. Understanding which risks you need to manage and determining how much you can spend to address them is vital for proper project risk management. The key is to be methodical. Categorize and address your most vital risks and save yourself from the risk of going crazy.

## 2. Variability and ambiguity risks

Not knowing what you need to know can be stressful. Not even knowing what you don't know can be distressing. Let's look at two categories of project risk that involve things you don't fully know. These risks can create problems if they're not considered. The first is variability risk. This is risk that comes from variables in your environment that always exist, but over which you have no control. For example, weather can have a significant impact on the schedule of a construction project. While you might target a time of year when the weather's more cooperative, weather will always vary. The second category is ambiguity risk. In contrast with variability risks where you know something will happen but the results will vary, like the weather, ambiguity risks deal with unknown factors about what will happen in the future. Examples of this are legislation that may be signed into law during the course of your project that require changes, new technical inventions that may improve or detract from your project, or a new product that may be introduced by a competitor that exceeds your deliverable's capabilities. To help you identify these two risk types, I've included a checklist with examples in the exercise file for this course. These two risk types are especially difficult as they have characteristics that are unknown. So how do you deal with them? Let's return to our variability risks. Timeframes or circumstances where the variability is less is the first place to look, so for example scheduling construction during periods when the weather is more favorable would demonstrate this approach. Here's another approach. If you have access to records from several past projects similar to the project you're running, you can compile a list of schedule possibilities for completing the project based on that history and plan your project around the information you uncover. If that project history is not available or you need more detailed schedule predictions, you can use Monte Carlo analysis. Monte Carlo analysis uses probability spreads compiled from running large numbers of possibilities through a math-based model to determine the range of possibilities for your project schedule. This can inform you about the chances of your schedule completing in varying amounts of time to help you manage schedule risk. Ambiguity risks are typically addressed by collecting expert opinions. For example, people who are close to the workings of government can help predict where and when laws might change. Industry experts would likely signal an upcoming new development like the moving downloading services that ultimately spelled the end for brick and mortar DVD rental stores. While you can never know every risk that may surface for your project, having a standard process for considering the possibilities is important so you don't get stung. Spending time looking at the potential impacts of variability and ambiguity risks can save you time, help you be ready for the unexpected, and increase your perception as a project leader.

## 3. Assess and prioritize analyzed risks

I hate spiders but I think snakes are pretty cool. My wife however, is terrified by both of them. Eliminating either of these critters in my yard is a high priority for her. However, I'd rather leave the snakes and get rid of the spiders. Our priority for risks is different. A similar situation will take place on your projects. It's important to remember that your stakeholders, sponsors, and project team may want you to treat risks differently. Here are the steps you can take to make sure you and your risk sensitive stakeholders will be aligned when it comes to managing your project risks. First, split your risks into impact type. Time impacts, scope impacts, and cost impacts. Once you've done this, consider your stakeholders' tolerance for these three types of risk. Second, consider prioritizing your risks to ensure the impact type with the lowest stakeholder tolerance gets a high priority. By understanding the sensitivities of your stakeholders and sponsor and adjusting the way you prioritize things, you'll have an easier time managing risk on your project. The third step in refining your risk analysis is to consider your potential risk treatment actions and their cost. Then compare the actual cost the risk would add to your project and most importantly the impact to the perception of your stakeholders. A project manager and sponsor rarely have a large fund to mitigate risks. As a result, you need to decide how to allocate those funds wisely. If you only have $200,000 of risk treatment funding available to manage risk on your project, you want to have the risk prioritized and only allocate the $200,000 to the risks that should be addressed. This prioritization should consider the overall financial impact to the risk, the cost of addressing the risk, and the risk tolerance of your sponsor and senior stakeholders. Once you've done this, you're ready to take the fourth and final step to completing your risk analysis. Share your prioritized risks with your sponsor. I have included a table in the exercise files to provide you with a format I recommend. Here are some tips to finalize your risk analysis. It's important that you communicate your estimates and assumptions so you and your stakeholders understand your thought process. And last, fault on the side of being inclusive, involve as many stakeholders as you can. Not only will you produce a better risk analysis product but in the event an unexpected risk does become an issue, you won't be alone when answering the dreaded why didn't you think of that question? Taking these steps to assess and prioritize risks is well worth it. Understanding who will react to each type of risk can help you understand and proactively work with your stakeholders. Kind of like understanding that your boss might be terrified of that snake. So even though you think it's cool with beautiful markings, best keep it away from him.