---
layout: post
title: "Respond to project risks"
date: 2021-01-03 00:04:00 +0700
author: "Learning Archive"
tags: project_management risk learning_archive
series: PM101
preview: "Project managers are like Superman or Wonder Woman with bullets coming at them. The bullets are risks and you want to plan risk responses to the incoming bullets. You could step out of the way, avoiding the risks. You could use a shield to deflect the bullets or mitigate the risk."
---

## 1. Common risk responses

Project managers are like Superman or Wonder Woman with bullets coming at them. The bullets are risks and you want to plan risk responses to the incoming bullets. You could step out of the way, avoiding the risks. You could use a shield to deflect the bullets or mitigate the risk. You could pick up a bad guy and put him in the way of the bullets transferring the risk. Or, having super powers, you could accept the risk of being hit by the bullets if they won't harm you. While we aren't actually superheroes, we do have the same variety of risk responses. Let's take a close look. Avoiding a risk means we eliminate it. Whatever risk might be present, we take action to make it irrelevant. Let's say your project involves something out of fiberglass, however, a risk exists that the fiberglass might be too flexible so instead, you and the team decide to make the component out of steel. You avoided the risk by using steel. Another response, is to mitigate the risk. You do so by reducing the probability or reducing the impact of a risk occurring. Let's look at reducing the probability of a risk occurring first. Let's say you're concerned that the vendor you're working with might be late in delivering their products to you. One approach, reducing the probability of lateness being an impact is to put a contingency contract in place with a second vendor. You could call upon them if the primary vendor will be late. The second approach, is to reduce the impact of a risk occurring. You could create an alternate project schedule to perform tasks later than involve the parts you're receiving from the vendor. You can also respond with transference. In transference, you shift the risk to someone else. The most common example of this is taking out insurance. When you get insurance on your car, much of the risk impact is transferred to the insurance company. You can also accept the risk. This means you do nothing to avoid the risk. It's a common response for low priority risk events. Lastly, you can escalate the risk. You do this when risk is beyond the project manager's scope. For example, a change in strategy for the company, isn't a risk that the property manager would normally be involved in. The responses for positive risks or opportunities are similar. Excepting and escalating have the same meaning. Instead of avoiding the risk, we strive to exploit it. Increase the possibility of it occurring to 100% when possible. Share, replace as transfer, you involve another party to increase the positive effects or probability of the opportunity occurring. Finally, enhance replaces mitigate where we increase the probability or impact of the positive risk occurring. As you can see, you have great options for response approaches to address your risk. Even if you aren't a superhero. Think through them and you'll easily clean-up your project.

## 2. Write your risk plan

I have a problem. I love building risk plans, but sometimes I forget I have those plans when I get into the day to day excitement of project execution. So, how do I ensure the risk activities I plan for are executed when I need them? The answer is create a risk response plan, a document that captures your risks, the analysis you've performed, and guides your actions going forward. Let's talk about what to include in your risk response plan. First, the risk response plans lists your risks, including identified risk causes, descriptions, and potential impacts. Second, include your qualitative and quantitative analysis results and your response plan for each risk. You may include a primary and secondary risk response plan if appropriate. Third, include contingency reserve funds that have been allocated. If you have risks that include contract-related actions you'll discuss with your vendors, note these as well. After these fundamentals are in your risk response plan, these additional elements can turn a risk response plan into a powerful control document. The most significant item to add to each risk is the timing for when you need to either A, assess the status of the risk, or B, execute a response action. These can be added as tasks in your project schedule and assigned to a specific individual. Here's an example. When I was moving from the US to a work assignment in Australia and having my household goods sent to Australia by sea, I didn't know when I packed the container, whether it would go from LA to Sydney directly or via Singapore. Therefore, when I arrived in Australia, I didn't know if I needed to get a short-term furnished apartment or arrange for a permanent place to live where I would have my furniture delivered. I had a housing risk to manage. I had to know two timing-critical actions against that risk. When to check the schedule status of my shipment to determine if my furniture would be available and when I needed to find a temporary furnished apartment if needed. The next significant item to have in your risk response plan are status dates for your vendors, or to check on products from areas not under your control. Going back to my furniture shipment, I had another risk to manage. The customs agent in Australia could decide to inspect my goods shipment or hold it in quarantine for a period of time. I had to monitor the progress of my household goods through Australia customs. I had no control over them and had to establish dates when I needed to get temporary housing, even though my furniture might be in the country with me. By ensuring your plan is robust and helps you track the actions required to monitor and execute responses against risks, you can dramatically reduce the impact of risk on your project and not experience things like getting stuck with a house but no furniture.

## 3. Understand risk triggers

Good project risk managers resemble park rangers. Park rangers construct towers to keep an eye on the landscape, looking for signs of trouble. This works well because where there's smoke, there's usually fire. You should do the same thing. As smoke is the warning sign for fire, I suggest you spend time thinking of what are called risk triggers, early warning signs like smoke that indicate a project risk is about to become a reality. Let's look at two common types of risk trigger. The first type of risk trigger is one that gives you an immediate indication that a risk may be happening. You may have technical experts that are going to join your project at some point downstream. You request these technical experts to start attending status meetings one month before they're due to start so they can hit the ground running and know what's happening on the project. The time for them to participate has arrived, you remind them of their commitment, and they don't show up for the status meeting. This is a likely risk trigger that other priorities might put the expert's participation in your project at risk. The second type of risk trigger are forward indicators. Unlike smoke, which indicates the fire is happening now, forward indicator risk triggers are signals something is going to happen in the future. Tuna fishermen provide a useful example of a forward indicator risk trigger because they have risk triggers tied to the temperature of the water at different times of the year. They understand if it's going to be plentiful fishing season or if there's a risk of poor fishing depending on the water temperature. Project risk triggers can vary and typically involve people's behavior, unexpected schedule changes, or task deadline failures. No matter the type or variety, here are hints for determining and handling risk triggers. I've provided a short checklist of potential risk triggers in the exercise files. First, do some research. Potential sources for risk triggers include prior risk logs, post-implementation reviews, and issues logs from past projects. Second, once you've determined reasonable risk triggers, empower your team to search for them. The reality is that while you have to keep your eye on things, you can't be everywhere. Empower your project team so they understand the risk triggers too. Get them to staff the watchtowers and look for smoke. Third, plan what you're going to do when you spot a risk trigger. The whole idea of utilizing risk triggers is to enable you to react quickly and decisively. Have a risk response plan for when you spot that smoke. Just like your doctor uses a series of tests to assess your health, risk triggers help you validate the health of your project. So, just like the park rangers, watch diligently, understand what you're looking for, and react promptly and you'll have a healthy project without large fires.